README.md, before:

# Small Language Model

This repository contains all the necessary items needed to build your own LLM from scratch. Just follow the instructions.

## Introduction
---
Inspired from Karpathy's nanoGPT and Shakespeare generator, I made this repository to build my own LLM. It has everything from data collection for the Model to architecture file, tokenizer and train file.

### Architecture
---
![architecture](https://github.com/shivendrra/SmallLanguageModel-project/blob/main/null.png)
### Data Collection
---
I used transcripts of around 167k YouTube videos and scrapped around 10k web-pages and generated around ~5Gbs of data. You can download the data from [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Shivendrra/YouTubeTranscriptData) if you don't wish to repeat the process. I would recommend you to at-least try once, generating the data from that same process, not much but small files, so that you understand it.
If you want to specially learn about it, the data collection part, here is the repo: [Data-Collection Repository](https://github.com/shivendrra/data-collection)
#### YouTube Transcripts
---
YouTube's V3 API is required to fetch results(video ids, urls and captions). Use `Data Collector/transcriptCollector.py` for collecting the data. `Channel_Ids.json` already has more than 45 channels' ids who have available caption data. It will take around 3days to fetch all the transcripts from over 200K videos and file size will be ~3GBs.
#### WebScrapping
---
WebScrapper uses `BeautifulSoup` and `requests` library in python to scrape data from the web, _Britannica.com_ in this case. `mainScrapper.py` scrapes data from the website by building custom urls from the `search_queries.json` and then requesting on the url to get the data.

This generates a .txt file of ~600-700MBs approx. You can add more queries and topics for more data.

### Pre-processing & tokenization
---
###### ***Character Level***
In the initial working of the model, I used character level encoding and tokenization, for the Bi-gram model.

```python
# this is a basic character level tokeinzer  
chars = sorted(list(set(text)))
vocab_size = len(chars)

# encoder - decoder
stoi = { ch:i for i,ch in enumerate(chars) }
itos = { i:ch for i,ch in enumerate(chars) }

encode = lambda s: [stoi[c] for c in s] # encoder: take a string, output a list of integers
decode = lambda l: ''.join([itos[i] for i in l]) # decoder: take a list of integers, output a string
```

###### ***Sub-word Level***
Implemented Byte-Pair Encoding this time using `tik-token` library from **OpenAI.** Wrote a basic training, encoding, decoding and saving model functions and then imported as a module in the code. It works fine.

```python
# Final Models/Transformer/tokenizer.py

import tiktoken

pre_encodings = 'p50k_base'
pre_model = 'text-davinci-003'

class Tokenizer:
  def __init__(self, encoding=None, model=None):
    self.encodings = encoding if encoding is not None else pre_encodings
    self.model = model if model is not None else pre_model
    self.tokenizer = tiktoken.get_encoding(self.encodings)
    self.tokenizer = tiktoken.encoding_for_model(self.model)

  def encode(self, data):
    return self.tokenizer.encode(data)

  def decode(self, tokens):
    return self.tokenizer.decode(tokens)

  def get_vocab(self):
    return self.tokenizer.n_vocab
```

### Training
---
It's very simple, once you have a dataset, downloaded from huggingface or generated using the code provided, you'll have to choose the model you want, bi-gram or transformer, import it along with the tokenizer and train loop, and train it according to your required iterations. Modify `hyperparams.json` as your wish.
Or you can just use the pre-written `main_script.py` to start training it.
I've also provided Colab Notebooks for each type of model, in case you want to train it on a bigger level like me.

``` python
# main_script.py
import json
import os
os.chdir('D:/Machine Learning/SLM-Project')

with open('Final Models/Transformer/hyperparams.json', 'r', encoding='utf-8') as file:
  params = json.load(file)

import torch
batch_size = params['batch_size']
block_size = params['block_size']
n_head = params['n_head']
n_embd = params['n_embd']
n_layer = params['n_layer']
dropout = params['dropout']
learning_rate = params['learning_rate']
device = 'cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu'

# importing training data for model
file_path = 'Data/training_data.txt'
with open(file_path, 'r', encoding='utf-8') as file:
  captions = file.read()

# tokenizing the data
from tokenizer import Tokenizer
tokenizer = Tokenizer()
input_data = tokenizer.encode(captions)

# train-test split
n = int(0.9*len(input_data))
train_data = input_data[:n]
val_data = input_data[n:]
train_data = torch.tensor(train_data, dtype=torch.long)
val_data = torch.tensor(val_data, dtype=torch.long)
vocab_size = tokenizer.get_vocab()

from transformer import TransformerModel
model = TransformerModel(n_embd=n_embd, block_size=block_size, dropout=dropout, n_head=n_head, n_layer=n_layer, vocab_size=vocab_size, norm_eps=1e-5)
model = model.to(device)
optimizer = torch.optim.AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)
n_param = sum(p.numel() for p in model.parameters()) / 1e6
print(f"no of parameters present are {n_param} million")

from train_model import TrainModel
train = TrainModel(model=model, optimizer=optimizer, train_data=train_data, val_data=val_data, batch_size=batch_size, block_size=block_size)
train.train_model()

# saving the model
torch.save(model.state_dict(), f"{n_param:.1f}m_model.pth")

# generating output
target_text = "Would you like to tell me your name because "
context = torch.tensor([tokenizer.encode(target_text)], dtype=torch.long, device=device)
generated_output = tokenizer.decode(model.generate(context, max_new_tokens=10)[0].tolist())

print(generated_output)
```

### Models
---
#### RNN
---
`Final Models/RNN` directory contains all the necessary codes to run a RNN model, `tikoken` library for tokenizing and encoding the data.
This has some issues, that I need to fix

#### Bi-Gram Model
---
Made with the help of Karpathy's video '[Let's build GPT: from scratch, in code, spelled out](https://youtu.be/kCc8FmEb1nY?si=aHFUrNbYudojGW4j)' with some changes in hyper-parameters and tokenization process, rest is almost same.

#### Basic-Transformer
---
It follows a basic architecture, just `Block` class that has layers of `MultiHeadAttention`,  `FeedForward` followed by two Normalization layers, repeating n times and a Linear layer at final. Very basic, easy to understand.

```python
# transformer model

class GPTLanguageModel(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.token_embedding_table = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, n_embd)
        self.position_embedding_table = nn.Embedding(block_size, n_embd)
        self.blocks = nn.Sequential(*[Block(n_embd, n_head=n_head) for _ in range(n_layer)])
        self.ln_f = nn.LayerNorm(n_embd, eps=norm_eps) # final layer norm
        self.lm_head = nn.Linear(n_embd, vocab_size)
        self.apply(self._init_weights)

    def _init_weights(self, module):
        if isinstance(module, nn.Linear):
            torch.nn.init.normal_(module.weight, mean=0.0, std=0.02)
            if module.bias is not None:
                torch.nn.init.zeros_(module.bias.data)
        elif isinstance(module, nn.Embedding):
            torch.nn.init.normal_(module.weight, mean=0.0, std=0.02)
```

### Contributing
---
Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.
Please make sure to update tests as appropriate.

### License
---
none!

Commit message:

some major changes in file structure

README.md, after:

# Small Language Model

This repository contains all the necessary items needed to build your own LLM from scratch. Just follow the instructions.

![Watch the video](https://youtu.be/PVpyN_2z5II?si=ComGouNtcXctmLvE)

## Introduction
---
Inspired from Karpathy's nanoGPT and Shakespeare generator, I made this repository to build my own LLM. It has everything from data collection for the Model to architecture file, tokenizer and train file.

### Architecture
---
![architecture](https://github.com/shivendrra/SmallLanguageModel-project/blob/main/null.png)

### Data Collection
---
I used transcripts of around 167k YouTube videos and scrapped around 10k web-pages and generated around ~5Gbs of data. You can download the data from [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Shivendrra/YouTubeTranscriptData) if you don't wish to repeat the process. I would recommend you to at-least try once, generating the data from that same process, not much but small files, so that you understand it.
If you want to specially learn about it, the data collection part, here is the repo: [Data-Collection Repository](https://github.com/shivendrra/data-collection)
#### YouTube Transcripts
---
YouTube's V3 API is required to fetch results(video ids, urls and captions). Use `Data Collector/transcriptCollector.py` for collecting the data. `Channel_Ids.json` already has more than 45 channels' ids who have available caption data. It will take around 3days to fetch all the transcripts from over 200K videos and file size will be ~3GBs.
#### WebScrapping
---
WebScrapper uses `BeautifulSoup` and `requests` library in python to scrape data from the web, _Britannica.com_ in this case. `mainScrapper.py` scrapes data from the website by building custom urls from the `search_queries.json` and then requesting on the url to get the data.

This generates a .txt file of ~600-700MBs approx. You can add more queries and topics for more data.

### Pre-processing & tokenization
---
###### ***Character Level***
In the initial working of the model, I used character level encoding and tokenization, for the Bi-gram model.

```python
# this is a basic character level tokeinzer  
chars = sorted(list(set(text)))
vocab_size = len(chars)

# encoder - decoder
stoi = { ch:i for i,ch in enumerate(chars) }
itos = { i:ch for i,ch in enumerate(chars) }

encode = lambda s: [stoi[c] for c in s] # encoder: take a string, output a list of integers
decode = lambda l: ''.join([itos[i] for i in l]) # decoder: take a list of integers, output a string
```

###### ***Sub-word Level***
Implemented Byte-Pair Encoding this time using `tik-token` library from **OpenAI.** Wrote a basic training, encoding, decoding and saving model functions and then imported as a module in the code. It works fine.

```python
# Final Models/Transformer/tokenizer.py

import tiktoken

pre_encodings = 'p50k_base'
pre_model = 'text-davinci-003'

class Tokenizer:
  def __init__(self, encoding=None, model=None):
    self.encodings = encoding if encoding is not None else pre_encodings
    self.model = model if model is not None else pre_model
    self.tokenizer = tiktoken.get_encoding(self.encodings)
    self.tokenizer = tiktoken.encoding_for_model(self.model)

  def encode(self, data):
    return self.tokenizer.encode(data)

  def decode(self, tokens):
    return self.tokenizer.decode(tokens)

  def get_vocab(self):
    return self.tokenizer.n_vocab
```

### Training
---
It's very simple, once you have a dataset, downloaded from huggingface or generated using the code provided, you'll have to choose the model you want, bi-gram or transformer, import it along with the tokenizer and train loop, and train it according to your required iterations. Modify `hyperparams.json` as your wish.
Or you can just use the pre-written `main_script.py` to start training it.
I've also provided Colab Notebooks for each type of model, in case you want to train it on a bigger level like me.

``` python
# main_script.py
import json
import os
os.chdir('D:/Machine Learning/SLM-Project')

with open('Final Models/Transformer/hyperparams.json', 'r', encoding='utf-8') as file:
  params = json.load(file)

import torch
batch_size = params['batch_size']
block_size = params['block_size']
n_head = params['n_head']
n_embd = params['n_embd']
n_layer = params['n_layer']
dropout = params['dropout']
learning_rate = params['learning_rate']
device = 'cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu'

# importing training data for model
file_path = 'Data/training_data.txt'
with open(file_path, 'r', encoding='utf-8') as file:
  captions = file.read()

# tokenizing the data
from tokenizer import Tokenizer
tokenizer = Tokenizer()
input_data = tokenizer.encode(captions)

# train-test split
n = int(0.9*len(input_data))
train_data = input_data[:n]
val_data = input_data[n:]
train_data = torch.tensor(train_data, dtype=torch.long)
val_data = torch.tensor(val_data, dtype=torch.long)
vocab_size = tokenizer.get_vocab()

from transformer import TransformerModel
model = TransformerModel(n_embd=n_embd, block_size=block_size, dropout=dropout, n_head=n_head, n_layer=n_layer, vocab_size=vocab_size, norm_eps=1e-5)
model = model.to(device)
optimizer = torch.optim.AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)
n_param = sum(p.numel() for p in model.parameters()) / 1e6
print(f"no of parameters present are {n_param} million")

from train_model import TrainModel
train = TrainModel(model=model, optimizer=optimizer, train_data=train_data, val_data=val_data, batch_size=batch_size, block_size=block_size)
train.train_model()

# saving the model
torch.save(model.state_dict(), f"{n_param:.1f}m_model.pth")

# generating output
target_text = "Would you like to tell me your name because "
context = torch.tensor([tokenizer.encode(target_text)], dtype=torch.long, device=device)
generated_output = tokenizer.decode(model.generate(context, max_new_tokens=10)[0].tolist())

print(generated_output)
```

### Model
---
#### Basic-Transformer
---
It follows a basic architecture, just `Block` class that has layers of `MultiHeadAttention`,  `FeedForward` followed by two Normalization layers, repeating n times and a Linear layer at final. Very basic, easy to understand.

```python
# transformer model

class GPTLanguageModel(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.token_embedding_table = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, n_embd)
        self.position_embedding_table = nn.Embedding(block_size, n_embd)
        self.blocks = nn.Sequential(*[Block(n_embd, n_head=n_head) for _ in range(n_layer)])
        self.ln_f = nn.LayerNorm(n_embd, eps=norm_eps) # final layer norm
        self.lm_head = nn.Linear(n_embd, vocab_size)
        self.apply(self._init_weights)

    def _init_weights(self, module):
        if isinstance(module, nn.Linear):
            torch.nn.init.normal_(module.weight, mean=0.0, std=0.02)
            if module.bias is not None:
                torch.nn.init.zeros_(module.bias.data)
        elif isinstance(module, nn.Embedding):
            torch.nn.init.normal_(module.weight, mean=0.0, std=0.02)
```

#### Seq-2-Seq Transfomer
---
It is the more complex one, with encoder and decoder layers present, repeating `n_times` to give the output. It's still in progress, I'll make it and upload it as soon as possible.

![transformer, complex one](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1100/format:webp/1*lakCEUEsboAelz-yum7SjA.png)

### Contributing
---
Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.
Please make sure to update tests as appropriate.

### License
---
none!
